thousands of Palestinians are gathering
on Al rashed Street in Gaza waiting for
the arrival of flower and vital Aid some
trucks managed to enter the strip but
the limited supplies will only help a
small fraction of the population Israel
allows any a trickle of Aid into Gaza
despite un warnings about critical
famine conditions Samir Abdul Jabar is
the director of emergencies at the world
food program and joins us now live from
Rome Mr ABD ja good to have you with us
on the program sir in all the confusion
and the various news lines that the
audience are expected to digest over the
war in Gaza the reasons behind why the
world food program has suspended its
operations can sort of get lost in all
of the information can you just remind
us why you've suspended deliveries to
Northern Gaza and how long this may
last sorry can you hear me now yeah we
can hear you clearly sir did you get my
question yes thank thank you very much
soil and and I have to say that we are
very alarmed also on that decision to
pose the the assistance to the north one
because there are many desperate
civilians that are in need for our
support but the reality on the ground is
that we were able only to do little six
Convoy since the beginning of the year
two in in in February and uh under very
very difficult situations that was
putting the people receiving the aid at
risk so we had to take that very tough
decision for us and for the people to
protect them uh but we are looking for
every way to revert that decision and
and and continue the assistance in a way
that protects their lives and just to
confirm because I think you really
answered my next question is what is
getting into Gaza you just mentioned six
trucks there since the beginning of the
year and and how quickly is it getting
through those Israeli administered
checkpoints not very quickly it
seems so it's six convoys each Convoy of
10 trucks but I I think you touched on a
very important point the delays at the
checkpoints are making it impossible for
us to reach deeper into the northern
Gaza where there are lots of people that
are in need of the assistance and that
has been putting our convoys but also
the people at risk um and that's why
we've been actually negotiating with all
parties to make sure that they make it a
speedy access for us so safe Roots is is
one of our requirements to continue
assistance in the north and that can
only be guaranteed if there is a speedy
process for uh uh our convoys to move
into the north can you give us an idea
of the bottleneck um of Aid on the
Egyptian side of uh the the Border as
such trying to get into Gaza I mean what
is waiting there to get into
Gaza so we have enough food across the
borders even from Jordan and and Egypt U
to be able to support 2.2 million people
I think all we are asking for and I
think I think if like you mentioned
earlier the ceasefire materializes we
need to make sure that we have the right
access into Gaza from different
Crossings so that we can actually reach
the people whether they're in the North
or the south of the central areas uh the
reports that you were showing earlier is
is is showing the amount of desperation
that we are voicing as well and that's
why we need to make sure that we're
reaching people and and making sure that
where wherever Crossing that is open
we're actually izing in a in a safe way
for the people but also for our own
staff in recent weeks we've seen
statements made at the international
court of justice about Aid getting
into uh Gaza and food not being used as
a weapon of War we've heard appeals at
the UN Security Council in recent days
from various Aid agencies explaining how
difficult and how dire the situation is
what reasons if you can tell us
diplomatically what reasons do the
Israelis give for those delays of Aid
trucks not being able to get through the
border from Gaza to Rafa I think has
that has to be
clarified I think there there will be a
briefing to the security Council later
this week on uh uh 2417 Security Council
resolution uh I think let let's wait to
see what would come out in the
recommendations there because uh
definitely we are advocating with all
stakeholders involved in the conflict uh
to make sure that we are able to avert
any any
risk of famine by reaching the people in
in different areas we need to make sure
to we're able to get the the sufficient
levels of food into the the uh
communities uh we need to make sure that
we're looking at the malnutrition
situation and the health situation and
the Water Crisis and make sure that we
are actually addressing this uh um
collectively because that is the only
way for us to avert all those risks that
are affecting the civilians you
mentioned the word famine there and of
course we're now seeing the first
examples of famine and a two-month old
baby having died the alarm Bells have
been ringing from the UN and the world
food program about this as the world
food program who do you call when you
start hearing about this scenario
unfolding famine children dying who do
you call and speak to and say look we've
got to alleviate this we've got to sort
this out obviously the UN Secretary
General will be my first point of point
of
contact
so the the IPC that was issued in
December is actually 18 agencies they
work on it um and there is an update
that's going to be done in in in March
um that is how famine is declared I
think at the moment the situation for us
is terrible it's it's really worrying
and I was listening to the report that H
did just before I joined the call and
and and I think we only can relate I
just left that operation recently and I
can relate to my own colleagues on the
ground who have gone through those
situation and still going through those
situation where they need to secure for
their own kids the food and and clean
water and and and Health Services so I
think the situation is really dire and
and and we're doing everything we can
we're talking to everyone we should be
talking to to make sure that we're
actually flagging that risk and and
looking at M mitigation measures that
allows us to reach people at scale it's
not just about preaching them I think
it's about preaching them in sustained a
scalable way that they can trust that
the humanitarian assistance can be
reverting all of those risks that
they're going through for the update
thanks very much for joining us may
Abdul Jaa from the world food program in
Rome thanks for your time
sir thank you very much